# All About Butter

You don’t really need to think about butter this much. But once you start, it’s hard to unsee the differences. If you walk into a supermarket and spend an inordinate amount of time in the dairy aisle, as I’ve been known to do, you’ll come across the butter section, where you’ll find all manner of foil-wrapped blocks piled high and stacked on top of each other. There’s Kerrygold from Ireland, Président from France, Lurpak from Denmark, and a dozen others sitting shoulder to shoulder in the chiller, each bearing grandiose proclamations about how their particular interpretation of churned cream is superior to everybody else’s. And the thing is, some of them do actually have a point. Butter should be one of the simpler foods out there, at least in theory. It’s cream that’s been churned until it stops being cream and starts being butter. End of story. Except no, it’s not. It’s not the end of the story. Try sampling a few variants and you’ll discover how different parts of the world have managed to arrive at noticeably different versions of what is ostensibly the same ingredient. But before we get into all that, let’s begin with the simplest distinction of all: salted and unsalted. Now you might be thinking at first that this seems like the sort of thing that doesn’t warrant further discussion. One has salt. The other doesn’t. Thank you for reading. Photography: Roman Biernacki | PexelsThe cows, unsurprisingly, have a large say in how the butter turns out But as a (hopefully) habitual consumer of my articles, you’ll have come to expect that the facts are a little more complicated than they might initially seem. Salt doesn’t serve to just season butter; it also acts as a preservative and changes the way flavours present themselves. That’s why salted butter spread over a toasty dinner roll can feel like you don’t even need the dishes that come after, and why bakers tend to favour unsalted butter because it gives them precise control over how much seasoning ends up in a recipe. Reach for the wrong one, and it could suddenly feel like you’ve got a little too avant-garde and decided that brining your cookies would be a good idea. If we turn our attention to Europe, which is where some of the best butter comes from, you’ll find that their dairy excellence stems from a level of seriousness that rivals that one bespectacled kid in your class whose enthusiasm for trains was a little concerning. European butter generally contains at least 82% milk fat, compared to the 80% commonly found elsewhere. And while that might not sound like much, those extra percentage points mean less water and a vastly dialled-up richness. Ever bitten into a particularly good croissant and found yourself sharing half of it with your trousers by the end? That’s because higher-fat butter is partly responsible for creating those delicate, shattering layers. Photography: Luciann Photography | Pexels The lush greenery of the Irish isles makes for some of the world’s best butter Some European butters are also cultured, meaning bacteria are added to the cream before churning, allowing it to ferment slightly. I realise “fermented butter” sounds like the sort of thing you’d discover at the back of a neglected refrigerator, but it’s actually a vital contributor to some of the best butter in the world. The process introduces a faint tanginess and complexity that can make a good French butter taste almost faintly cheese-like. You need only spread some beurre d’Isigny over a warm piece of sourdough to see exactly what I mean. The Irish are another bunch that are well-known for their butter, and their secret ingredient is, well, Ireland. The region’s famously mild and rainy climate means cows spend much of their lives grazing on fresh pasture, and this fills their milk with beta-carotene, which is what gives Irish butter its striking golden colour. Photography: tracy benjamin | Flickr Kerrygold is a world-class butter widely available at grocery stores Put a block of Kerrygold next to a paler butter and see how immediately obvious the difference is, with the product of the Irish plains being the gleaming sort of yellow that looks like somebody cut out a block of the eight o’clock sun. Then we have ghee, which takes the entire concept and runs off in a rather different direction. In India, the climate is, shall we say, not particularly kind to butter, or much of anything else really. But butter, especially, doesn’t stand a chance. And so their fix for this was to simmer away the water and remove the milk solids, leaving behind a nutty and deeply aromatic cooking fat that is nigh on impervious to high temperatures. So, to encapsulate, butter is not just butter and I’m not just a dairy-obsessed pedant. It’s a block that bears the hallmarks of climate, tradition, and the perspicacity of generations of people fiddling with the same basic ingredient until it suited their particular corner of the world. That’s quite a lot of history indeed for something most of us absent-mindedly leave sitting in the fridge door. Opening image: Felicity Tai | Pexels butterShare Leave a reply Cancel reply Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Related PostsEat4 weeks agoEquatorial Is Taking Malaysia Across Japan, One Prefecture At A TimeAt Home10 months agoEverything You Need To Know About Dry-Aged Steak Before You OrderEat9 months agoQuick And Easy Air Fryer Recipes For The Chronically Stove‑AverseStay Informed With the Latest & Most Important News
